Richargable nickel cadmium batteries, have, with reasons, become a popular 
source of power for portable and handportable equipment. They can provide 
reliable service over many years if due account is taken of their 
peculiarities. Yet it remain true that many amateurs are failing to appreciate 
not only the full capabilities but also the limitations of nicad cells used in 
battery packs.

J.Fielding,ZS5JF,in "Nickel cadmium batteries for amateur radio equipment" 
(Radio ZS september 1987,pp4-5) provides a useful survey of the facts and 
foibles of nicads.The following extracts from his article attack some of the 
common myths and also provide some safety hints.

1) "Rapid charging causes a decline in cell capacity".
NOT TRUE provided that the charge is always terminated at a safe point.

2) "You should not charge only partially discharged cells as this causes a 
loss in capacity."
NOT TRUE. It is not necessary to discharge fully nicad batteries before 
charging. In fact, THE OPPOSITE is true. Repeated partial charging gives an 
increase in the number of charge/discharge cycles compared with 
full-discharged cells.

3) "White crystals growing on the tops of nicad cells mean that the seal is 
faulty and the cell should be scrapped."
NOT TRUE. The electrolyte (potassium hydroxide) is extremely searching and can 
penetrate the seals used in minute quantities. These crystals are potassium 
carbonate, which is harmless and can be removed with soap and water. The 
action of the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere reacts with the electrolyte to 
form the crystals. After removing the crystals, it is recommended that a smear 
of silicon grease is applied to slow down the growth of new crystals.  The 
amount of electrolyte lost in this way is insignificant.

4) " I have a cell which appears to take a charge, but after the normal 
charging period the open circuit voltage is very low. I have been told I 
should throw it away."
NOT TRUE. The reason the cell won't take a charge is usually due to minute 
crystalline growth across the internal electrodes, caused by prolonged 
storage. A cure that nearly always works is to pass a very high current for 
very short time through the affected cell. This fuses the internal "whisker".
Discharging a large electrolytic capacitor is one method of doing this. But 
note that in a battery the faulty cell MUST be isolated from the other cells 
since zapping the complete battery will not usually result in a cure. Charge 
the capacitor to about 30v and then discharge it through the faulty cell. 
Several attemps may be required to clear a stubborn cell.

5) "A battery contains a cell with reversed polarity. The only cure is to 
replace it".
NOT TRUE. The reversed cell ca usually be corrected by a similar technique as 
that given for 4). After re-polarising the cell, the complete battery can be 
recharged in the normal way. Full capacity can be regained after about five 
cycles.

6) "A nicad battery should be stored only in a discharged state".
NOT TRUE. It can be stored in any state of charge. Due to its inherent 
self-discharging characteristics it will eventually become fully discharged 
after a sufficiently long period of storage. To recharge the battery before 
returning it to service, a "conditioning" charge of 20h at the normal charging 
rate is recommended. Afterwards charge normally; full capacity can again be 
expected after about five cycles.

7) "It is not advisable to keep a nicad battery on permanent trickle charge as 
this causes permanent degradation of the cells".
NOT TRUE. So long as the trickle charge current is adjusted correctly, the 
charge can continue indefinitely without loss in cell capacity. The safe 
current can usually be obtained from the manufacturer's data, but 0.025C is a 
reasonable guide (ie. about 100mA for a 4Ah cell and PRO-RATA). This enables 
the battery to remain fully charged.

ZS5JF also lists seven safety points that should be considered by users:

1) DO NOT short circuit a fully-charged battery. This if prolonged, can cause 
excessive gas production with the danger of possible rupturing of the sealed 
case.

2) Nicads contain a caustic electrolyte: this is perfectly safe as long as 
common sense is used in use and handling of the cells.

3) A nicad can supply a very high current for a short period (a 4Ah cell can 
supply over 500A for a few seconds). Sufficient thought should be given when 
selecting a fuse between the battery and the equipment. The connecting wire 
should be capable of passing enough current to ensure the fuse blows quickly 
in the event of a short circuit.

4) DO NOT use partially-discharged cells with fully-charged ones to assemble a 
battery. Assemble the battery with all the cells discharged and then charge 
them as a battery.

5) DO NOT carry a fully- or partially-charged battery on an aircraft without 
taking proper safety precautions. A short-circuited battery pack ca be a time 
bomb in such situations. Consult the relevant IATA regulations or ask at the 
airline check-in.

6) DO NOT subject battery packs to very high or low temperatures. Never 
dispose of a battery pack in a fire or throw it out with domestic waste.
If it cannot be disposed of properly it is probably best to bury it in the 
garden in a safe spot.

7) DO NOT discharge battery packs below about 1V per cell, otherwise there is 
a possibility of cell reversal.

ZS5JF provides a good deal of other information on charging nicad batteries, 
and gives as a reference a Varta publication of 1982 "Sealed Nickel Cadmium 
Batteries" from which some of his notes may have been derived. (G3VA)



The failures the article talks about occur in mutli-cell Ni-Cd battery packs,
and are due to the voltage differences between cells.  Say you have four 1.25 V
cells in a pack connected to a 200 ohm load.  The load "sees" 5 volts and draws
25 mA.  Since each cell must pass the entire 25 mA and each cell's potential is
1.25 volts, Ohm's Law tells us that each cell sees the equivalent load of 50
ohms.

But in practice, no four cells in a battery ever exhibit exactly the same output
voltage.  Assume that one cell is delivering only 1.2 V, and the others are at
1.25 volts.   Now, the 200 ohm load sees 4.95 volts and draws 24.75 mA.  Since
all four cells must pass the entire 24.75 mA, each of the strong cells at 1.25
volts sees an equivalent load of 50.5 ohms; the weak cell sees only 48.5 ohms.
The weak cell works into the heaviest load and as a result will discharge more
rapidly than the other cells.  If the pack is charged for only a short period
of time, the weak cell, which has been working the hardest, is also the one
that receives the least charging power.

This usually doesn't matter if you trickle charge after each day of flying.
The inequality is small for any given charge or discharge cycle, due to the
relatively flat output voltage NiCd cells exhibit over most of their range.
But a combination of incomplete charges and deep discharges will exaggerate
the energy difference between a weak cell and the other cells.  Operated
continually in this manner, the weak cell invariably reaches its "knee," the
point at which its voltage decreases sharply, long before the other cells
reach the same point.

Now comes the problem!  Suddenly, the weakest cell sees an increasingly heavy
load, which causes its voltage to drop even faster.  This avalanche continues
until the cell is completely discharged, even as the other cells continue to
force current to flow.  The inevitable result is that the weak cell begins to
charge in reverse, which eventually causes an internal short.  Once an
internal short develops, recharging the cell at the normal rate is 
futile.  The short simply bypasses current around the cells active materials.
(Even though the cell is apparently dead, most of its plate material is still
intact.)  If the small amount of material that forms the short could be removed,
the cell would be restored to virtually its original capacity once again.


Using the circuit shown, the internal short can be burned away in a few seconds.
In operation, energy stored in the capacitor is rapidly discharged through the
dead cell to produce the high current necessary to clear the short. Current is
then limited by the resistor to a safe charge rate for a small A cell.

Several applications of discharge current are usually necessary to clear a cell.
During the "zapping" process, it is a good idea to connect a voltmeter across
the cell to monitor results.  Momentarily close the normally open pushbutton
switch several times to successively zap the cell, allowing sufficient time
for the capacitor to charge up between zaps, until the voltage begins to rise.
Then, with the toggle switch closed, watch as the potential across the cell 
climbs to 1.25 volts.  If the potential stops before full voltage is reached,
some residual short remains and another series of zaps is in order.  If you
observe no effect whatsoever after several zaps and shorting out the cell and
taking an ohmmeter measurement indicates a dead short, the cell is beyond
redemption and should be replaced.

Once full cell potential is achieved, remove the charging current and monitor
battery voltage.  If the cell retains its charge, it can be returned to charge
and eventually returned to service.  But if the cell slowly discharges with no
appreciable load, the residual slight short should be cleared.  To do this,
short circuit the cell for a few minutes to discharge it, zap again, and
recharge it to full capacity.

Good luck.



You don't have to remove the cell from the pack (unless it is in parallel
with another cell).  Just clip the zapper leads to the terminals of the
cell.  In fact, it seems to me that it may even work without isolating
the cell if there is a cell in parallel.  The shorted cell should take
most of the current, and the non-shorted cell some current as well.





My Toshiba battery was force-charged by a friend who has some sort
of generic charging equipment. It had reached a point where the machine
would not operate at all with the battery - even plugged in. Now it has
remained plugged & working for months, i.e, I have overcome the problem
of always shuffling batteries for home use. My other battery (still
good, I hope) sits on the shelf for when I travel. The 'dead' battery
isn't good without the power supply.

Bill Ross



Easy FIX for NICADS that REALLY works!

It's simple, it's easy, and it really works well!



First reinforce the battery pack (if in one) with clear cellophane tape.



Then drop the battery,  onto it's side,  on the floor from about 6

ft. up. You  want it to be a really HARD drop:  but don't break the

battery.  Do this seven  or more times for each battery.



If it's in a pack, drop the pack so each battery hits the floor seven

times.



I know this seems crazy,  but it DOES work,  and well.  If it doesn't

work the  first time,  try again; harder!  You have nothing to lose,

since you'd have to  replace the battery anyway.



An example:  the batteries in my portable printer are 8 years old.  

They were  at  the  point where even after 24 hours charge,  and still

plugged  into  the  charger,  the printer wouldn't operate.  After

dropping, I now get three weeks  of printing from one charge.



So far,  it's never failed.   What have you got to lose?  Post your

results so  others can benefit, and spread the word!

Read me now, or save me for later. (in that imfamous Hans `n' Frans tone) :-)


Ok, so you have a T1000SE, and you have found how it does not work if you do
not have a good battery on the back. You called Toshiba, and suddenly felt
woozy. Aftermarket? Shure! $60 for the T1200XE pack (extended life, the only
way to go), but there still has to be a better way, the "college student
method"!

You call a battery store, and discover that the pack is 'sealed' and can not
be rebuilt. Then again, you never did listen to the 'no user serviceable parts
inside' lables. 

The plan? Open it, replace the cells, and close it up.

Opening:

	It is sealed, ultrasound welded actually. All you need to do is break
this thin joint. Take the pack off of the computer (back up that hardRAM!) and
place it so that the metal contact squares are faceing you and up. The part
faceing up, or the bottom of the pack, was physically seprate from the rest of
the shell. Note that all 4 metal contact squares are attached to this piece.
Now get 2 THIN screwdrivers or knives(jewlers screwdrivers work GREAT). Pick a
point that is faceing you (so it will not show when the battery is
reinstalled) and push a screwdriver in the small crack/seam between the two
pieces. Continue to CAREFULLY pry apart the rest of the seam, and remember,
the contact squares are comming all together. After having it all opened, make
shure to keep the latch and spring (trust me!).

Replacement:

	Call you local battery distrubitor, or Mr. Nicad, or TNR-The battery
store (#'s should be in the 1-800 directory), tell them you got it open. Give
them the measurements of one of the cells. I believe they are 4/3A 1700mah,
and should be about $5 a shot. Mr NiCad does know them as T1000SE cells last I
checked. Get 6 of them. Looking at the old pack, replicate it using the new
cells, wire, tape, whatever! DO NOT FORGET THE TEMPRATURE SENSOR! The little
black thing attached to one of the cells in the original pack is VERY
important! After haveing everything hooked up, you are just about done.

Close it up:

	Check that the contact squares do have voltage around what you would
expect (5-7.2V). Reassemble the case, and hold it shut however you see fit.
Since I use only one pack, having it on the computer holds it together, and
makes it easy to show others my hack. If you have 2 or more, scotch tape
should help, or even super-glue. But be warned, you might want to open the
pack again some time, and super-glue will make that VERY difficult.

There ya go! Good luck!
Any questions to sknapp@iastate.edu
Flames or insults to /dev/null!

I hereby declare this to be advice, use at own risk! I am not responsible for
your actions! 